---
title: 'Abstract: Physical Reasoning in Complex Scenes is Sensitive to Mass'
sharing: false
layout: page
---

Many human activities require precise judgments about the dynamics and
physical properties -- for example, mass -- of multiple
objects. Classic work suggests that people’s intuitive models of
physics in mass-sensitive situations are relatively poor and
error-prone, based on highly simplified heuristics that apply only in
special cases. These conclusions seem at odds with the breadth and
sophistication of naive physical reasoning in real-world
situations. Our work measures the boundaries of people’s physical
reasoning in mass-sensitive scenarios and tests the richness of
intuitive physics knowledge in more complex scenes. We asked
participants to make quantitative judgments about stability and other
physical properties of virtual 3D towers composed of heavy and light
blocks. We found their judgments correlated highly with a model
observer that uses simulations based on realistic physical dynamics
and sampling-based approximate probabilistic inference to efficiently
and accurately estimate these properties. Several alternative
heuristic accounts provide substantially worse fits. In a separate
task, participants observed virtual 3D billiards-like movies and
judged which balls were lighter. In contrast to the previous
experiments, we found their judgments to be more consistent with
simple, visual heuristics than a simulation-based model that updates
its beliefs about mass in response to prediction errors. We conclude
that rich internal physics models are likely to play a key role in
guiding human common-sense reasoning in prediction-based tasks and
emphasize the need for further investigation in inference-based tasks.
