---
title: 'Abstract: Physics knowledge aids object perception in dynamic scenes'
sharing: false
layout: page
---

People naturally infer unobservable physical properties such as mass,
elasticity, and friction in many uncertain and complex scenarios. For
example, when picking up a cup of coffee it is useful to determine the
weight; similarly, when walking around in socks, it is useful to infer
how slippery the floor is. We hypothesize that humans reason about
such situations using an "intuitive mechanics" that allows physical
knowledge to inform visual "beliefs" about a dynamic scene as it
unfolds over time. To test people's ability to make these inferences,
we showed participants simulated 2D movies of arrangements of red and
yellow building blocks colliding, collapsing, or remaining
upright. They then estimated properties such as the mass ratio or
elasticity between differently colored blocks. In different trials we
presented static "previews" of the scene for varying durations in
order to modulate participants' initial visual precision at estimating
the blocks' positions. People's judgments were sensitive to variations
in mass ratio, elasticity, and preview length, making more consistent
and accurate judgments when allowed a longer preview. We compared
these results with a probabilistic time-series observer model which
makes its judgments using knowledge of collision dynamics and
Newtonian mechanics in a simulation-based inference procedure. Visual
precision in the model is represented through uncertainty in block
positions; both human judgments and model predictions vary
proportionally with the level of uncertainty, implying an important
role for visual precision in physical reasoning. Our model is
additionally designed to handle arbitrarily complex situations and can
predict people's judgments in scenarios ranging from simple two-body
collisions to complex stacks of objects. We conclude that human
judgments of latent physical properties depend both on the precision
of visual scene interpretation and knowledge of how physical laws
influence the scene's dynamics.
