---
title: 'Abstract: Probabilistic simulation as the engine of intuitive physical inferences'
sharing: false
layout: page
---

In a glance, we can perceive whether a stack of dishes will topple, a
branch will support a child's weight, a grocery bag is poorly packed,
liable to tear or crush its contents, or a tool is firmly attached to
a table or free to be lifted. Such rapid physical inferences are
central to how people interact with the world and with each other, yet
their computational underpinnings are poorly understood. We propose a
model based on an intuitive physics engine, a cognitive mechanism
similar to computer engines that efficiently simulate rich physics in
video games and graphics, but that uses probabilistic simulations to
make robust inferences in complex natural scenes where crucial
information is unobserved. Our model fits data from six psychophysical
experiments, captures several illusions and biases, and explains core
aspects of human mental models and common-sense reasoning that have
eluded traditional logical and statistical approaches to intelligence.

[![Everyday scenes, activities, artwork and games that evoke strong physical intuitions][2]][2]

 [2]: /images/BatHamTen-fig1.png

#### Everyday scenes, activities, artwork and games that evoke strong physical intuitions.

(A-B) A cluttered workshop that exhibits many nuanced physical
properties. The table supports the tools and other objects; the tire
is leaning against table leg.  
(C) A precarious stack of dishes looks like an accident waiting to
happen.  
(D) A child exercises his physical reasoning by building stacks of
blocks.  
(E) Artists exploit powerful physical expectations to make a dramatic
impression (E: "stone balancing", photo by H. Brinkmann; F: the "Idee
di Pietra" by Giuseppe Penone outside of the University of Chicago's
Harper Center).  
(G-H) Jenga and Finger Physics put physical intuitions to the test in
the real and virtual worlds.
