---
title: Research
comments: false
layout: page
sharing: false
---

At any given moment, the mind needs to decide *how* to think about *what*, and
for *how long*. The mind’s ability to manage itself is one of the hallmarks of
human cognition, and these meta-level questions are crucially important to
understanding how cognition is so fluid and flexible across so many situations.
While it is important to understand how the mind works with respect to
individual tasks, it is equally important to understand how the mind reasons on
a meta-level across tasks. Under the assumption that thinking is analogous to
computing, my aim is to develop a mathematical theory of how the mind manages
its computational resources. Using machine learning methods including Bayesian
models, reinforcement learning, and deep learning, I build normative models of
how people should make meta-level decisions and evaluate these models using a
variety of behavioral methods.

<img src="/images/mass-tower.png" style="float:left; margin: 1em 2em 1.5em 0em;" />

I investigate the problem of cognitive resource management by focusing in
particular on the domain of *mental simulation*. Mental simulation is a phenomenon
in which people can perceive and manipulate objects and scenes in their
imagination in order to make decisions, predictions, and inferences about the
world. For example, take a look at the image to the left, and imagine that the
gray blocks are made out of heavy stone, and that the green blocks are made out
of a light plastic. Which direction will this tower fall? How do you know? Many
people report that they know the answer because they can visually imagine what
it will look like when the tower falls. In other words, they solve the problem
mentally simulating what will happen.

Importantly, if thinking is computation, then mental simulation is one
particular type of computation analogous to having a rich, forward model of the
world. Given access to such a rich model, how should the mind use it? How does
the mind infer anything from the outcomes of its simulations? How many resources
should be allocated to running which simulations? When should such a rich
forward model be used in the first place, in contrast to other types of
computation such as heuristics or rules? Understanding the answers to these
questions provides broad insight into people’s meta-level reasoning because
mental simulation is involved in almost every aspect of cognition, including
perception, memory, planning, physical reasoning, language, social
cognition, problem solving, scientific reasoning, and even creativity.

The ideas regarding meta-level reasoning that I have explored in cognitive
science are highly relevant to other fields such as machine learning, robotics,
and artificial intelligence, for two reasons in particular. First, I think that
cognitive science can bring new ideas and perspective in thinking about the
problem of intelligence: humans are, after all, the best example of intelligence
that we have. Second, while AI need not mimic human intelligence, it does need
to interact and communicate with people. It is important that AI is built with
the quirks of human intelligence in mind, which requires that researchers in
computer science work together with researchers in cognitive science,
psychology, and other fields in the social sciences.

For more details, please see my [publications](/publications). I have also given
a somewhat more accessible interview on the [Data Skeptic podcast](http://dataskeptic.com/epnotes/models-of-mental-simulation.php)
about some of my research.
