---
title: Asking Good Questions (To Receive Great Answers)
layout: post
permalink: /2010/10/04/asking-good-questions/
comments: true
categories:
  - General
  - Programming
  - Software
tags:
  - hacking
  - internet
  - teaching
---

A few months ago, I blogged about [problems in the hacker world][1].
One of the biggest issues that people ended up mentioning in comments
and other discussion with me is that it is important for
less-experienced people to ask intelligent questions of the
more-experienced people. If they are able to do that, then the
more-experienced hackers will be able to help faster and more easily,
and will be more likely to put the effort into providing a helpful
response. So... how do you ask good questions?

 [1]: /2010/07/27/social-problems-in-computer-science/

<!-- more -->

The classic guide is [How To Ask Questions The Smart Way][2], which I
was pointed at as recently as a year ago to improve my question-asking
skills (and, coincidentally, I've become much more technically
competent in the past year). Since reading that article, I've think
that I've significantly improved my ability to do research beforehand,
and to formulate well thought-out questions before asking them. The
article is quite long, so I'll summarize a few of the more relevant
points here (but I highly encourage you to go read the whole thing
yourself). I'm focusing more here on people who are beginning hackers,
as opposed to users with questions.

 [2]: http://www.catb.org/esr/faqs/smart-questions.html

1. **Do research beforehand.** If you have a question to ask, you
  should try to find the answer yourself before you go ask somebody
  else. One of the things that's most valued in the hacker community
  is the ability to find things out yourself. Most of the people that
  you view as extremely competent and awesome and smart got that way
  because they went to all the effort to find things out for
  themselves. If you never do the work yourself, then you won't learn
  the answers as well. Furthermore, having the *ability* to find
  answers itself is very useful -- what happens when you become an
  expert in your field, and there is nobody else to ask questions of?
  If you don't have the ability to find the answers for yourself, then
  you will have hit a dead end.

2. **Include as much information as possible.** Don't just say that
  your computer or some program is broken and it needs to be fixed,
  say *how* it's broken. For example, if Firefox keeps freezing when
  you start it up, say so! Don't just say "Firefox doesn't work any
  more"; people aren't mind readers, and we won't be able to help you
  if you don't give us specific information on the
  problem. Furthermore, if you've tried to fix it yourself (see #1),
  say what research you've done (e.g. what you've Googled for) and
  what you might have done to try to fix the problem. Don't say what
  you *think* might be wrong unless you have evidence to back it up;
  otherwise, it's just irrelevant and unhelpful.

3. **Ask about methods or pointers rather than concrete solutions.**
  Occasionally, you just need a factual answer to a question, but more
  often than not, it's more useful to ask for pointers or methods of
  solving the problem. If you're asking about some large aspect of a
  program or project, then it is probably better to ask for
  documentation that you can read. First of all, the person you're
  asking probably doesn't have time to tell you about all of it;
  second, you'll now have a resource you can refer to again and again
  when you forget details. For example, if I wanted to learn about
  AFS, I might ask a hacker friend to point me at a document giving a
  good overview of AFS (and they might point me at [AFS and You][3],
  though I should have been able to find that by Googling "afs
  mit"). In other cases, if you do not know the solution to a problem,
  you might want to ask what sort of method or tool you can use to
  solve your problem, and where a good overview of using that tool
  would be. In another example, if I wanted to know how to add
  user-defined variables into my Debian package, I would ask how that
  is done. My friend might tell me about Debconf, and point me to a
  [tutorial][4] on using it. In both of these examples, the questioner
  gains a new tool or resource. If the person they were asking had
  just fixed their problem for them, then they wouldn't have learned
  anything new, and would know just as little as they did before.

4. **Be polite.** Don't expect people to give you their time freely at
  your beck and call. If they are going to help you, they're doing it
  because they're *volunteering* their time (and most likely, they are
  usually busy with a lot of other projects). If you're going to ask
  them a question, then at least be respectful of the fact that
  they're helping you out of the goodness of their hearts, and that
  they don't have endless time or patience. In addition, if you are
  polite, then they'll be more likely to be polite as well.

5. **Don't grovel.** Just because you're new and ignorant of a lot of
  the tools and methods that experienced hackers use doesn't mean that
  you are incompetent or incapable of learning them. Don't act like
  you are! Just state your question clearly and with
  confidence. Apologizing for not knowing anything or being new or
  whatever isn't going to help your case; if anything, it will hurt
  your chances of getting help, because claiming that you're
  incompetent implies that you can't or are unwilling to learn
  anything new. Giving that impression is perhaps the worst possible
  thing you can do: we want to help people who are eager to learn, but
  are instantly turned off by people just seeking someone to do the
  work for them.

 [3]: http://sipb.mit.edu/doc/afs-and-you/
 [4]: http://www.fifi.org/doc/debconf-doc/tutorial.html

Do you have other points that you find important when asking (or
answering) questions? If there was one thing you would encourage
people to do when asking questions, what would it be? On the flip
side, how can more experienced people answer questions better? What
problems do you run into on that end?
