---
title: 'Abstract: Intuitive mechanics in visual reasoning about complex scenes with unknown forces'
sharing: false
layout: page
---

People have a powerful "physical intelligence" -- the capacity to
infer physical properties of objects and predict future states in
complex dynamical scenes -- which is central to how they interpret
their environment and plan safe and effective actions. With little or
no training and only a short visual presentation, people can easily
judge subtle properties of scenes and anticipate future events, even
when uncertain factors, like external forces, and more complex
properties, like friction and physical connectedness, are
involved. For instance, when you place a cup on your desk, you
visually inspect the scene and identify locations likely to be robust
to someone bumping it, factoring in surface friction and connections
between objects. We hypothesize that the brain relies on a
sophisticated system of knowledge about physics, i.e. an "intuitive
mechanics", which applies to a wide variety of common arrangements of
objects, and which allows it to make these rich inferences and
plans. We developed a probabilistic model to capture this hypothesis,
which input visual stimuli containing arrangements of objects, and
which predicted potential physical consequences under external forces,
friction, and connectedness. To evaluate the model in scenarios like
the desk example above, we presented participants with scenes
depicting virtual tables with random stacks of red and yellow blocks,
and asked them to judge which color would more likely fall off if an
unknown bump were applied. In some cases we informed them, either
verbally or visually, that some colors were connected (i.e. reds are
attached to reds), or that some colors were subject to greater or
lesser friction, and measured whether and how people's judgments
responded to these manipulations. We compared people with our model
and found good correspondence; in particular, people demonstrated
accurate reasoning about potential external bumps and appropriate
sensitivity to friction and connectedness properties.
